\input texinfo    @c -*- texinfo -*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename truename-cache.info
@settitle truename-cache
@documentencoding UTF-8
@documentlanguage en
@c %**end of header

@dircategory Emacs
@direntry
* Truename-Cache: (truename-cache). Efficiently de-dup file-names.
@end direntry

@finalout
@titlepage
@title truename-cache
@author Martin Edström
@end titlepage

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top truename-cache

@quotation
[!WARNING]
This is a BETA release!
Breaking changes are possible.

@end quotation

This Emacs library provides two things:

@enumerate
@item
@samp{truename-cache-get}: A caching alternative to @samp{file-truename}.

@item
@samp{truename-cache-collect-files-and-attributes}: Basically an alternative to @samp{directory-files-recursively} that pre-populates cache and returns truenames while minimizing calls to @samp{file-truename}.
@end enumerate

@end ifnottex

@menu
* Why?::
* Bonus Merging lists::
* Bonus Filtering::
* Bonus Abbreviation::
* Appendix On referring to inodes instead of truenames::
@end menu

@node Why?
@chapter Why?

Truenames are useful as a way to de-duplicate file lists and to cross-reference names in one list with names in another list.

But if you write code that just wraps every file name it encounters in @samp{(file-truename FILE)}@comma{} it gets slow if you have large lists of file names. It takes 1@comma{}000 milliseconds to process 1@comma{}000 file names on my machine.

That is unacceptable@comma{} at least in the use-case where you often scan a list of directories to see if any new files have appeared or any files were modified or deleted.

That's the sort of thing that might be done as part of a user command.  If the command is to be pleasant to use@comma{} it must take less than 100 milliseconds so it feels "instant".  And you may be dealing with not 1@comma{}000 but 10@comma{}000 or even 100@comma{}000 files.

Sidenote for Elisp devs: It might occur to you that you can also de-dup by filesystem inodes.  See @uref{https://github.com/meedstrom/truename-cache?tab=readme-ov-file#appendix-on-referring-to-inodes-instead-of-truenames, Appendix: On referring to inodes instead of truenames}.

@node Bonus Merging lists
@chapter Bonus: Merging lists

The routine @samp{truename-cache-collect-files-and-attributes} can be used to merge multiple file lists and return de-duplicated truenames.

Why? See some example file-lists in Emacs that may overlap a lot:

@itemize
@item
Variable @samp{recentf-list}
@item
Variable @samp{org-agenda-text-search-extra-files}
@item
Variable @samp{org-id-files}
@item
Variable @samp{org-id-extra-files}
@item
Output of @samp{(org-files-list)}
@item
Output of @samp{(hash-table-values org-id-locations)}
@end itemize

Even if you @samp{append} and @samp{seq-uniq} these lists@comma{} a given file may still be represented multiple times under different names.

To merge@comma{} pass all your file-lists in the argument @samp{:infer-dirs-from}.  In truth@comma{} it doesn't operate directly on any of the files given@comma{} it just infers their parent directories and then scans each directory once.  That turns out to be efficient@comma{} even if it's likely to pull in more unique files than were mentioned by any name in the input.

@node Bonus Filtering
@chapter Bonus: Filtering

While you could simply let @samp{truename-cache-collect-files-and-attributes} return a giant file list and filter it afterwards@comma{} there are two reasons to do some filtering through the arguments @samp{:relative-file-deny}@comma{} @samp{:relative-dir-deny} and/or @samp{:full-dir-deny} (which take lists of regular expressions).

@enumerate
@item
They filter early@comma{} so you can avoid recursing into directories that you were never gonna keep anyway -- e.g. the contents of @samp{.git/} or @samp{node_modules/}@dots{}

It can easily make the difference between a runtime of 2.00 seconds and 0.02 seconds!  That is what happens inside my @samp{~/.emacs.d/} when I prevent recursion into @samp{elpa/}@comma{} @samp{elpaca/} and @samp{.git/}.

@item
If you wanted to apply your filters to relative file names rather than absolute names (@uref{https://github.com/org-roam/org-roam/pull/2178, which can fix surprising bugs})@comma{} you'd ordinarily have to use @samp{(file-relative-name FILE DIR)} on every file@comma{} and that isn't completely free either@comma{} keeping in mind our aforementioned 100 millisecond budget.

That's why it provides @samp{:relative-file-deny}@comma{} @samp{:relative-dir-deny}.  Another bottleneck dodged.
@end enumerate

@node Bonus Abbreviation
@chapter Bonus: Abbreviation

Sometimes you do not want a true name@comma{} but a name abbreviated with @samp{abbreviate-file-name}.  For one thing@comma{} it's just preferable to present such names to the user@comma{} but for another@comma{} that's what will match the confusingly named buffer-local variable @samp{buffer-file-truename} -- the actual truename will not.

(Even @emph{more} confusingly@comma{} the function @samp{get-truename-buffer} needs the actual truename@dots{})

But @samp{abbreviate-file-name} is another thing that can consume much of our aforementioned 100 millisecond budget@comma{} all by itself.

So @samp{truename-cache-collect-files-and-attributes} can pre-abbreviate names for you with the argument @samp{:abbrev 'full}.

This does it slightly more efficiently (informal benchmark: 50-75% of normal runtime)@comma{} and much more if you also pass @samp{:local-name-handlers nil} (informal benchmark: 20% of normal runtime).

@quotation
[!TIP]
For those of you who roll your own code@comma{} you can get the same effect by using a copy-pasted definition of @uref{https://github.com/minad/consult/blob/d1d39d52151a10f7ca29aa291886e99534cc94db/consult.el#L795-L809, consult--fast-abbreviate-file-name} or come close by just let-binding @samp{file-name-handlers-alist} to nil.

In that case@comma{} this library only sets itself apart from your solution by the fact it falls back on @samp{:remote-name-handlers} if remote names are encountered@comma{} in case that is needed for correctness.

@end quotation

@node Appendix On referring to inodes instead of truenames
@chapter Appendix: On referring to inodes instead of truenames

I have a theory that if de-dup is all you want@comma{} it would be possible by making use of the function @samp{file-attribute-file-identifier}.

I've not tried that.  However@comma{} the truename-based method brings some upsides.

@enumerate
@item
It's more hacker-friendly: when something needs debugging@comma{} better to see a file name than some meaningless inode number.

@item
Once you have a list of true names@comma{} it is very easy to manipulate.

The assumption that they are true leads to other safe assumptions@comma{} such as that an alphabetic sort automatically groups by directory.

You can use trivial string comparisons like @samp{string-prefix-p} in place of @samp{file-in-directory-p}@comma{} saving performance (one is ~10@comma{}000x slower than the other).

Example use-case: @uref{https://github.com/meedstrom/org-node/blob/f9ef31aa212b33b79383c0c749e0003a69e697a2/org-node.el#L976, org-node--root-dirs}@comma{} which takes shortcuts because it knows the input is all truenames.
@end enumerate

@bye
