\input texinfo
@setfilename calibre.info
@include version.texi
@settitle calibre.el @value{VERSION}
@syncodeindex pg cp

@copying
This manual is for calibre.el (version @value{VERSION},
@value{UPDATED}), a package for interacting with Calibre libraries from
Emacs.

Copyright @copyright{} 2023,2024  Free Software Foundation, Inc.

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
Invariant Sections, with no Front-Cover Texts, and with no Back-Cover
Texts.  A copy of the license is included in the section entitled
``GNU Free Documentation License''.
@end quotation
@end copying

@dircategory Emacs
@direntry
* Calibre: (calibre).     Interact with Calibre from Emacs.
@end direntry

@titlepage
@title calibre.el
@subtitle for version @value{VERSION}, @value{UPDATED}
@author Kjartan Oli Agustsson (@email{kjartanoli@@disroot.org})
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@contents

@node Top
@top calibre.el

This manual is for calibre.el (version @value{VERSION},
@value{UPDATED}).

@menu
* Getting started::
* Viewing your library::
* Modifying your library::
* Interacting with external reading devices::
* GNU Free Documentation License::
* Index::
@end menu

@node Getting started
@chapter Getting started
@vindex calibre-libraries
@cindex Library
@findex calibre-library
@findex calibre-select-library
To start using calibre.el customise the variable
@code{calibre-libraries}.  Each entry is a cons cell @code{(@var{NAME}
. @var{PATH})}, where @var{NAME} is a human readable name for the
library, and @var{PATH} is the library's location on your file
system.@footnote{This is the path you would specify during Calibre's
Welcome Wizard.}  Once you have defined your libraries call
@code{calibre-library} to view one of them.  If more than one library is
defined you will be prompted to select one of them.  To switch between
libraries call @code{calibre-select-library}.

@node Viewing your library
@chapter Viewing your library
@cindex Library buffer
@vindex calibre-library-columns
Your interface with your library is the @file{*Library*} buffer, created
by @code{calibre-library}.  The @file{*Library*} buffer contains a
listing of the books in the current library.  The exact metadata
displayed is controlled by @code{calibre-library-columns}.  Each entry
in @code{calibre-library-columns} is a cons cell @code{(@var{COLUMN}
. @var{WIDTH})}, where @var{COLUMN} is one of:
@table @code
@item id
The id of the book.
@item title
The title of the book.
@item authors
The authors of the book.
@item publisher
The publisher of the book.
@item series
The series the book is part of.
@item series-index
The book's position within its series.
@item tags
Any tags applied to the book.
@item formats
The formats the book is available in within the library.
@item pubdate
The book's date of publication.@footnote{To change how this is displayed
customize @code{calibre-library-time-format.}}
@item summary
The book's summary.@footnote{This field is likely to contain large
amounts of text which are not well suited to display in the
@file{*Library*} buffer.}
@end table
@var{WIDTH} is an integer specifying the number of characters the
corresponding column should take in the @file{*Library*} buffer.
@code{calibre-library-columns} has a setter which automatically updates
the @file{*Library*} buffer to reflect changes in its value.  You should
therefore take care to modify its value through methods which respect
this setter, such as the Customize interface @xref{Easy
Customization,,,Emacs}, or Emacs 29's @code{setopt}
@xref{Examining,,,Emacs}.

@menu
* Reading books::
* Searching::
@end menu

@node Reading books
@section Reading books
@findex calibre-library-open-book
@findex calibre-library-open-book-other-window
To read a book simply press @kbd{@key{RET}}
(@code{calibre-library-open-book}) with point on a particular book in
the @file{*Library*} buffer.  This will open a new buffer containing the
book at point in the current window.  Alternatively you can also press
@kbd{o} (@code{calibre-library-open-book-other-window}), which will open
the book in a different window.

@findex calibre-library-open-book-external
@vindex calibre-external-formats
To actually read a book Emacs must of course be able to display the file
format in which the book is stored, which may require the presence of
additional tools on your system @xref{Document View,,,Emacs}.  If Emacs
is not able to display your chosen format, or you simply prefer using
another program, you can also open the book in an external program using
@code{calibre-library-open-book-external} or customize
@code{calibre-external-formats}.  If an entry for a particular format
exists en @code{calibre-external-formats}
@code{calibre-library-open-book} will use the specified program instead
of opening the file in Emacs.

@menu
* Choosing formats::
@end menu

@node Choosing formats
@subsection Choosing formats
Some of the primary features of Calibre are its ability to convert
between different file formats, and the ability to store multiple
formats of the same book.  calibre.el does not yet support converting
between formats, but it does handle multiple formats of the same book.

@vindex calibre-format-preferences
When a book with multiple formats is opened one format must be selected.
In calibre.el this selection is performed by consulting
@code{calibre-format-preferences}, an ordered list defining your
preferences for file formats.  Whenever you open a book calibre.el will
search this list and select the first format applicable to the book
being opened.  If none of your preferred formats are available for the
book in question calibre.el will select one of the available ones.  If
you wish to override the automatic selection of a preferred format call
@code{calibre-library-open-book} or
@code{calibre-library-open-book-other-window} with a prefix argument
@xref{Arguments,,,Emacs}.

@node Searching
@section Searching
@cindex filter
@cindex basic filter
Searching in calibre.el is performed by the application of filters.  A
filter is either inclusive or exclusive and consists of the name of a
metadata field (@var{FIELD}) and a value against which that field should
be compared (@var{VALUE}).  A book matches a filter if its value for
@var{FIELD} is equal to @var{VALUE}.

As the names imply items that match an inclusive filter are included in
the search result, while items that match an exclusive filter are
excluded, but the system is slightly more complex.  Inclusive filters
form an intersection while exclusive filters form a union.  This means
that to be included an item must match @emph{ALL} inclusive filters, while to
be excluded it is sufficient to match @emph{ANY} exclusive filter.  To change
this behaviour a composite filter is used.

@cindex composite filter
A composite filter is composed of a set of filters, and can like normal
filters be either inclusive or exclusive.  However the
intersection/union semantics of composite filters are reversed compared
to their normal counterparts.  An inclusive composite filter is
therefore a set of filters for which it is sufficient for a book to
match ANY of its elements to be included, while an exclusive composite
filter is a set of filters for which a book must match all of its
elements to be excluded.

It is of course possible to combine composite and non-composite filters.
When doing so composite filters are treated exactly as any other base
filter, i.e. any book matching an inclusive composite filter must still
match all other inclusive filters.

@menu
* Interactive search::
* Virtual Libraries::
@end menu

@node Interactive search
@subsection Interactive search
@findex calibre-search
The most convenient method of applying filters to your library is the
interactive search interface provided by @code{calibre-search} which is
by default bound to @kbd{s} in the @file{*Library*} buffer.  When called
@code{calibre-search} opens a simple interface allowing you to quickly
apply any filter, and see the results immediately.  To apply a composite
filter enter the Compose sub-menu by pressing @kbd{C}, compose the
filter, and then apply it by pressing @kbd{a}, or cancel it by pressing
@kbd{q}.  The interactive search interface also allows you to remove the
last applied filter by pressing @kbd{u}, to remove multiple filters
press @kbd{u} again, or to clear all filters by pressing @kbd{c}.

@node Virtual Libraries
@subsection Virtual Libraries
@cindex Virtual Library
@vindex calibre-virtual-libraries
A virtual library is a named subset of your library, defined using the
filter mechanism.  To create a virtual library customize the variable
@code{calibre-virtual-libraries}.  Each entry in
@code{calibre-virtual-libraries} is a cons cell @code{(@var{NAME}
. @var{FILTERS})}, where @var{NAME} is a string identifying the virtual
library and @var{FILTERS} is a list of filters.

Each filter is either:

@cindex basic filter
A basic filter, which is a vector @code{[@var{OP} @var{FIELD}
@var{VALUE}]}.  @var{OP} is either @code{+} or @code{-}, where @code{+}
signifies an inclusive filter and @code{-} signifies an exclusive one.
@var{FIELD} is a symbol identifying the metadata field to match against,
it must be one of:
@itemize @bullet
@item title
@item author
@item publisher
@item series
@item tag
@item format
@end itemize
@var{VALUE} is the string to compare @var{FIELD} to.

@cindex fuzzy filter
For a given book to match against a basic filter the value of
@var{FIELD} for that book must be exactly equal to @var{VALUE}.
Sometimes this exact matching is undesirable and you would like to find
all books where @var{FIELD} contains @var{VALUE} instead.  This is
exactly what fuzzy filters do.

A fuzzy filter is a vector @code{[@var{OP} @var{FIELD} @var{VALUE} ~]}.
@var{OP}, @var{FIELD}, and @var{VALUE} have the same meaning as in a
basic filter.  The @code{~} is what identifies the filter as fuzzy.

@cindex composite filter
A composite filter, is a vector @code{[@var{OP} @var{FILTERS}]} where
@var{OP} has the same meaning as for basic filters and @var{FILTERS} is
a list of vectors @code{[@var{FIELD} @var{VALUE}]} or @code{[@var{FIELD}
@var{VALUE} ~]}.  In each such vector @var{FIELD} and @var{VALUE} have
the same meaning as for a basic filter and a @code{~} at the end marks
that particular component as fuzzy.

@node Modifying your library
@chapter Modifying your library
@vindex calibre-calibredb-executable
The operations discussed in this section perform modifications to
Calibre's metadata database through the @command{calibredb} executable
shipped with Calibre.  If Emacs does not find @command{calibredb}
customize @code{calibre-calibredb-executable} to point to it.

All database modifications are performed using asynchronous background
processes, this means that Emacs will not become unresponsive while
performing time consuming operations, such as adding many books at once.
It also means that the @file{*Library*} buffer may not immediately
reflect the results of these modifications.  The @file{*Library*} buffer
is automatically refreshed once the modification has been completed.

@menu
* Adding books::
* Adding formats to existing books::
* Modifying books::
* Removing books::
@end menu

@node Adding books
@section Adding books

@menu
* Adding individual books::
* Adding books in bulk::
* Tagging added books::
* Handling duplicate books::
@end menu

@node Adding individual books
@subsection Adding individual books
To add new books to your library press @kbd{a} in the @file{*Library*}
buffer, this invokes @code{calibre-library-add-book} which will prompt
you for the book you wish to add.  @code{calibre-library-add-book} also
accepts a directory, in which case the contents of that directory will
be added recursively.

@node Adding books in bulk
@subsection Adding books in bulk
@findex calibre-library-add-book
@findex calibre-dired-add
If you have many books you wish to add to your library, and
@code{calibre-library-add-book}'s ability to import directories is not
sufficient, i.e. your books are contained in different directories or
you only want to import some of the books in a particular directory, you
can make use of calibre.el's integration with Dired
(@pxref{Dired,,,Emacs}).  Mark the files you want to add in a Dired
buffer and call @code{calibre-dired-add} to add them all to your
library.

@node Tagging added books
@subsection Tagging added books
@vindex calibre-default-tags
If you have tags you want to apply to all books added to your library,
for example to tag all books as ``unread'', you can customise
@code{calibre-default-tags}.  Any tag present in this list will be
automatically added to the book.

For more specific control over tags both @code{calibre-library-add-book}
and @code{calibre-dired-add} can be called with a prefix argument.  When
called with a prefix argument they will prompt for a list of tags to
apply to the books being added.

@node Handling duplicate books
@subsection Handling duplicate books
When adding new books Calibre compares them with existing books in your
library in an attempt to determine if the book is already present.  When
a duplicate is detected Calibre can do one of three things:
@enumerate
@item
Ignore the new book
@item
Overwrite the existing book
@item
Create a new book, resulting in two distinct books in your library.
@end enumerate

@vindex calibre-automerge-policy
Which of these options calibre.el uses is controlled by the user option
@code{calibre-automerge-policy} whose three values:
@itemize
@item
Ignore
@item
Overwrite
@item
New Record
@end itemize
correspond to the three options.

@node Adding formats to existing books
@section Adding formats to existing books
@findex calibre-library-add-format
The @code{calibre-library-add-format} allows you to add formats to an
existing book.  The command will prompt for a file and add that file as
a new format to the book at point in the @file{*Library*} buffer.  Be
aware that if you provide a file in a format already present in the
library the existing file will be overwritten.

@node Modifying books
@section Modifying books
calibre.el provides two methods of modifying book metadata.  A dedicated
editing buffer providing full access to the metadata of a single book,
and a set of commands to make simple changes to a set of books directly
from the @file{*Library*} buffer.

@menu
* Modifying a single book::
* Modifying multiple books::
* Committing and reverting modifications::
@end menu

@node Modifying a single book
@subsection Modifying a single book
@findex calibre-edit-book
To edit a single book in your library, bring point to the line
representing that book in the @file{*Library*} buffer and press @kbd{e}
(@code{calibre-edit-book}).  This will open a customisation buffer which
you can use to edit the metadata of the book.  Once you are satisfied
with your edits press the Accept or Apply buttons.  You will see your
changes reflected in the @file{*Library*} buffer, and the book will be
marked as modified.


@node Modifying multiple books
@subsection Modifying multiple books
@findex calibre-library-mark
@findex calibre-library-mark-unmark
To edit multiple books at once you must mark them with
@code{calibre-library-mark} (bound to @kbd{m} by default).  A book can
be removed from the selection by calling
@code{calibre-library-mark-unmark} (bound to @kbd{u} by default).  Once
you are satisfied with your selection simply call any of the commands in
this section.  If no books are selected all of the commands in this
section will operate on the book at point.

@findex calibre-library-add-tags
@findex calibre-library-remove-tags
Currently the only metadata that can be modified from the
@file{*Library*} buffer are tags and authors, which can be manipulated
with the commands @code{calibre-library-add-tags},
@code{calibre-library-remove-tags}, @code{calibre-library-add-authors},
and @code{calibre-library-remove-authors}.  Both commands will prompt
for one, or more, tags or authors and respectively add them to any books
which do not already have them, or remove them from any books that do.

@node Committing and reverting modifications
@subsection Committing and reverting modifications
@findex calibre-library-execute
@findex calibre-library-mark-unmark
Modifications are not immediately applied to the underlying Calibre
library, they must be explicitly committed by calling
@code{calibre-library-execute}.  This allows you to modify multiple
books, and change your mind about modifications.  To undo any
modifications to a book, bring point to that book and press @kbd{u}
(@code{calibre-library-mark-unmark}), this will discard any
modifications which have not been committed by
@code{calibre-library-execute}.  To discard all modifications to all
books simply revert the @file{*Library*} buffer.

@node Removing books
@section Removing books
@findex calibre-library-mark-remove
@findex calibre-library-execute
To remove books from your library simply move point to the book you wish
to remove and press @kbd{d} (@code{calibre-library-mark-remove}).  This
will mark the book for removal.  Once you have marked all the books you
wish to remove, press @kbd{x} (@code{calibre-library-execute}) to remove
them.

@node Interacting with external reading devices
@chapter Interacting with external reading devices
Calibre has the ability to interact with external reading devices,
allowing to manage the books stored on these devices.  calibre.el now
supports a limited subset of this functionality in the form of the
ability to transfer books from your library to an external device.

To do this call @code{calibre-device-send-books} which will transfer all
marked books, or the book at point if no books are marked, to an
external device.  The transfer is performed asynchronously so it will
not block Emacs but it can take some time to complete.

Once the transfer is complete call @code{calibre-device-eject} to safely
eject the external device before unplugging it from your computer.

@include fdl.texi

@node Index
@unnumbered Index

@printindex cp

@bye
