\input texinfo    @c -*- texinfo -*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename org-gnosis.info
@settitle Org Gnosis User Manual
@documentencoding UTF-8
@documentlanguage en
@set MAINTAINERSITE @uref{https://thanosapollo.org,maintainer webpage}
@set MAINTAINER Thanos Apollo
@set MAINTAINEREMAIL @email{public@thanosapollo.org}
@set MAINTAINERCONTACT @uref{mailto:public@thanosapollo.org,contact the maintainer}
@c %**end of header

@copying
Copyright (C) 2025 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
Invariant Sections, with the Front-Cover Texts being “A GNU Manual,” and
with the Back-Cover Texts as in (a) below.  A copy of the license is
included in the section entitled “GNU Free Documentation License.”

(a) The FSF’s Back-Cover Text is: “You have the freedom to copy and
modify this GNU manual.”

@end quotation
@end copying

@dircategory Emacs misc features
@direntry
* Org Gnosis : (org-gnosis). Minimal note-taking system with linked notes.
@end direntry

@finalout
@titlepage
@title Org Gnosis User Manual
@author Thanos Apollo (@email{public@@thanosapollo.org})
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top Org Gnosis User Manual

@insertcopying

This manual, authored by Thanos Apollo, offers installation
instructions, customization options, and recommendations for
effectively using @code{org-gnosis}.

The documentation furnished herein corresponds to stable version
0.2.0, released on 2026-02-22.

@itemize
@item
Name: Org Gnosis | Organization Of Gnosis (knowledge/information)
@item
Homepage: @uref{https://thanosapollo.org/projects/org-gnosis/}
@end itemize

Org-gnosis provides a minimal note-taking system with linked notes.
It functions as an independent module, designed to integrate with
Gnosis (a self-testing system) but usable standalone.

The package implements Zettelkasten-style note-taking: notes have
unique IDs, link to other notes, and the system tracks backlinks.
Notes are stored as org files and indexed in an SQLite database.

When used with Gnosis, notes can link to themata (question subjects),
connecting note-taking with self-testing.  The system also provides
journaling functionality with customizable templates, either as
separate files or as headings in a single file.

@end ifnottex

@menu
* Installation & Configuration::
* Taking Notes With Org Gnosis::
* Configuration::
* Contributing::

@detailmenu
--- The Detailed Node Listing ---

Taking Notes With Org Gnosis

* Organizing your notes::
* Importing Notes::

Configuration

* Completions::
* Encryption::

Completions

* Diacritic Insensitive completions::

Contributing

* Sources::
* Patches Require Copyright Assignment To The FSF::

@end detailmenu
@end menu

@node Installation & Configuration
@chapter Installation & Configuration

@itemize
@item
The @code{org-gnosis} package is available from the GNU ELPA archive,
which is enabled by default.

@itemize
@item
Prior to querying an archive, make sure to update the index, with
@kbd{M-x package-refresh-contents}.
@end itemize

@item
Then all you need to do is type @kbd{M-x package-install} and
specify the @code{org-gnosis} package.
@end itemize

Example installation & configuration using @code{use-package}
@lisp
(use-package org-gnosis
  :ensure t
  :init
  ;; Example for separated journaling & notes keymap
  (define-prefix-command 'my/notes-map)
  (define-prefix-command 'my/journal-map)
  :config
  (defun example/org-gnosis-book-template ()
    (let ((date (format-time-string "%Y-%m-%d"))
          (book-title (completing-read
                     "Example book: "
                     '("Free Software, Free Society" "How to Take Smart Notes"))))
      (format "#+DATE: %s \n#+BOOK_TITLE: %s\n\n* Main Idea\n* Key Points\n* Own Thoughts"
              date book-title)))

  (add-to-list 'org-gnosis-node-templates
               '("Book Example" example/org-gnosis-book-template))
  :bind (("C-c n" . thanos/notes-map)
         ("C-c n j" . thanos/journal-map)
         :map thanos/notes-map
         ("f" . org-gnosis-find)
         ("i" . org-gnosis-insert)
         ("t" . org-gnosis-find-by-tag)
         :map thanos/journal-map
         ("j" . org-gnosis-journal)
         ("f" . org-gnosis-journal-find)
         ("i" . org-gnosis-journal-insert)
         :map org-gnosis-mode-map
         ("C-c C-." . org-gnosis-insert-tag)
         ("C-c i" . org-id-get-create))
  :custom
  (org-gnosis-dir "~/Notes")
  ;; Whe non-nil, create notes as gpg encrypted files, see epa config
  (org-gnosis-create-as-gpg t)
  ;; TODO files, commonly used for templates.
  (org-gnosis-todo-files org-agenda-files)
  ;; Used in #'org-gnosis-todos for template generation
  (org-gnosis-bullet-point-char "+")
  ;; Default completing-read function
  (org-gnosis-completing-read-func #'org-completing-read)
  ;; Recommended if you use a vertical completion system (e.g vertico)
  (org-gnosis-show-tags t))
@end lisp

@itemize
@item
See @ref{Encryption} for recommended settings when using @samp{gpg}
@end itemize

@node Taking Notes With Org Gnosis
@chapter Taking Notes With Org Gnosis

For Org Gnosis there are 2 types of notes,

@itemize
@item
Your ``permanent'' notes, which you can visit & and create using @kbd{M-x org-gnosis-find}

@item
Your journal notes, which you can visit & create using @kbd{M-x org-gnosis-journal-find}, which optionally can serve as
``fleeting'' notes.
@end itemize

As mentioned before, opening & searching your notes should be done
using @kbd{M-x org-gnosis-find} as this will enable
@samp{org-gnosis-mode}.

If @samp{org-gnosis-mode} is not enabled, files will not be parsed and
saved in the database when you run @samp{save-buffer}.

Org Gnosis does not automatically sync the database. To delete a file,
use @samp{org-gnosis-delete-file} or run @samp{org-gnosis-db-sync} after manual
deletion.

@menu
* Organizing your notes::
* Importing Notes::
@end menu

@node Organizing your notes
@section Organizing your notes

@code{org-gnosis} provides a zettelkasten-inspired approach to note-taking,
treating knowledge (gnosis) as valuable and not merely something to be
boxed into a single category, to be disposed after a certain period of
time or task accomplishment.

Using directories to organize your notes is not recommended, a
preferred method is to create @strong{MOC} files (Maps Of Contents) for
specific categories/projects that you are working on.

An MOC file can be the syllabus of a class or a project road map.  For
example, you might create an MOC like this for a class on
@code{Biopolymers}:

@itemize
@item
First create a node using @kbd{M-x org-gnosis-find} followed by
@code{Biopolymers}, which will be created if it does not already exist.
@item
Use @kbd{M-x org-gnosis-insert-tags} to insert @code{moc} tag.
@item
Start inserting your syllabus points with @kbd{M-x org-gnosis-insert} as nodes, which will be automatically created
& saved in separated files.
@end itemize

Example:
@example
:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       15edada1-9815-4fb3-9b8f-7da08107bdb2
:END:
#+title: Biopolymers Syllabus
#+filetags: :moc:

* Proteins
- Protein Structure Levels
- Protein Domains
- Protein MOTIF
- Difference between a motif and a domain in a protein
- Protein Families

* Nucleic acids
- DNA
- RNA
- Recognition and self-assembly of macromolecules
- Cytoskeleton

@end example
Note: Items with @samp{-} would be links.  The headings in the above
example could be links to an MOC as well.

This way your notes are atomic & can be reused in future
classes/projects.

@itemize
@item
For example you'd reuse your notes on nucleic acids in a genetics
class MOC for your next semester.
@end itemize

@node Importing Notes
@section Importing Notes

If you are a previous user of packages that use @code{org-mode} and org
ids, your current note collection should be able to work with
@code{org-gnosis} without you having to change anything.

To sync your note collection use @kbd{M-x org-gnosis-db-sync}

@node Configuration
@chapter Configuration

@menu
* Completions::
* Encryption::
@end menu

@node Completions
@section Completions

To customize completions of @samp{org-gnosis}, you can adjust the value
@samp{org-gnosis-completing-read-func}.

@menu
* Diacritic Insensitive completions::
@end menu

@node Diacritic Insensitive completions
@subsection Diacritic Insensitive completions

If you want to have diacritic insensitive completions you can use
something like this:

@lisp
(use-package ucs-normalize
  :functions (my/strip-diacritics)
  :config
  (defun my/strip-diacritics (s)
    "Remove diacritics from string S."
    (let ((decomposed (ucs-normalize-NFD-string s)))
      (replace-regexp-in-string "\\p@{Mn@}+" "" decomposed))))

(use-package org-gnosis
  :ensure t
  :after ucs-normalize
  :config
  (defun my/completing-read (prompt collection)
    "Prompt user with completing-read that ignores diacritics on completion.
Useful if you write in langs like Greek :)."
    (let* ((stripped-alist (mapcar (lambda (item)
                                     (cons (my/strip-diacritics item) item))
                                   collection))
           (map (let ((m (make-sparse-keymap)))
                  (set-keymap-parent m minibuffer-local-completion-map)
                  (define-key m " " #'self-insert-command)
                  m))
           (completion-table
            (lambda (string pred action)
              (if (eq action 'metadata)
                  '(metadata (category . diacritic-completion))
                (complete-with-action
                 action stripped-alist
                 (my/strip-diacritics string) pred))))
           (result (minibuffer-with-setup-hook
                       (lambda () (use-local-map map))
                     (completing-read prompt completion-table))))
      (or (cdr (assoc result stripped-alist)) result)))
  :custom
  (org-gnosis-completing-read-func #'my/completing-read))
@end lisp

@node Encryption
@section Encryption

Emacs provides built-in support for GPG encryption through @samp{epg} and
@samp{epa}.

You can use @samp{epa} (EasyPG Assistant) to customize how you want your
files encrypted, such as setting a default key to encrypt your files.

Example:
@lisp
(use-package epa
  :defer t
  :config
  (setf epa-keys-select-method 'minibuffer
        epa-file-encrypt-to '("62B758D0F6719938BC09CECA339F736C3A720928")
        ;; Do not prompt for key selection, we are only using the above key.
        epa-file-select-keys 'silent))

@end lisp

@node Contributing
@chapter Contributing

@menu
* Sources::
* Patches Require Copyright Assignment To The FSF::
@end menu

@node Sources
@section Sources

@itemize
@item
Main repository: @uref{https://git.thanosapollo.org/org-gnosis/}
@item
Mirrors:
@itemize
@item
@uref{https://codeberg.org/thanosapollo/emacs-org-gnosis}
@end itemize
@end itemize

@node Patches Require Copyright Assignment To The FSF
@section Patches Require Copyright Assignment To The FSF

Code contributions are most welcome.  For any major edit (more than 15
lines, or so, in aggregate per person), you need to make a copyright
assignment to the Free Software Foundation.  This is necessary as the
FSF must at all times be in a position to enforce the GNU General
Public License.

Here’s the process:

@enumerate
@item
Review and adapt the request form below.
@item
Email the specified address with your request.
@item
Await a legal agreement from the FSF@.
@item
Sign and return the document, which can be done via email.
@end enumerate

The entire process usually takes about a week and needs to be
completed only once, allowing you to contribute to GNU Emacs.

@example
Please email the following information to assign@@gnu.org, and we
will send you the assignment form for your past and future changes.

Please use your full legal name (in ASCII characters) as the subject
line of the message.

REQUEST: SEND FORM FOR PAST AND FUTURE CHANGES

[Additional people we should notify about the progress of the assignment.]

Thanos Apollo <public@@thanosapollo.org>

[What is the name of the program or package you're contributing to?]

Emacs

[Did you copy any files or text written by someone else in these changes?
Even if that material is free software, we need to know about it.]


[Do you have an employer who might have a basis to claim to own
your changes?  Do you attend a school which might make such a claim?]


[For the copyright registration, what country are you a citizen of?]


[What year were you born?]


[Please write your email address here.]


[Please write your postal address here.]


[Which files have you changed so far, and which new files have you written
so far?]

@end example

@bye
